---
layout: post
title:  "The Art of Never Being Satisfied"
date:   2023-01-17
excerpt: "A Guide to Writing for Perfectionists"
---
<p style="text-align: center;">How can we overcome perfectionism in our writing? As academics, we often set unrealistically high standards when we must put words to the page. Chronically slow writing and obsessive editing are common symptoms of perfectionist writing. Below, I offer some ways to overcome these roadblocks and unlearn the maladaptive features of perfectionism. I recommend that perfectionists learn how to separate writing from editing, in effect lowering the stakes of an otherwise stressful task. I discuss some specific strategies to this end, such as starting a daily writing log and using informal mediums to record our ideas. I emphasize the importance of knowing our limits while writing—that is, when it is time to rest in the interest of future progress. Though not exhaustive, this guide provides some tools for perfectionist writers to use in times of need. We can strive for excellent writing while also being kind to ourselves.</p>

### Introduction

Perfectionism is the enemy of productivity. Its principal feature is “the setting of excessively high personal standards of performance” (Frost et al. 1990, 450). This behavior is usually accompanied by overly critical assessments of one’s actions (Flett and Hewitt 2002). These two components form the conceptual core of perfectionism as well as underline a key part of what makes academic writing so challenging. After spending countless hours investigating a topic that we wish to do justice, it is hard not to feel the weight of the world on our shoulders when it is time to write.

We impose unreasonably high standards on our writing and feel as though we are failing expectations. For example, it is common to defer work on a literature review until we feel that we have a comprehensive grasp of extant research. This is an easy trap to fall into; we fool ourselves into believing that we can master some academic domain entirely on our own. The magnitude of this endeavor produces a mixture of pressure and isolation that squashes our drive to work as well as our ability to use time effectively. Now, having high standards for our writing is not bad in and of itself. The issue is that perfectionism creates needless obstacles to fruitful writing. Writing is an iterative process, like science and the acquisition of knowledge. Typically we cannot identify gaps in our understanding of a topic without first putting words to the page. This guide thus offers some advice on how to fight (and unlearn) perfectionism when writing.
